Add blog post about post templates (#319)
infinum/eightshift-docs: website/blog/2024-03-28-using-post-templates.md

---
title: Using post templates

> description: Explanation on what post templates are and how to use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Explaining post templates and how to use them.
```

slug: using-post-templates
authors: obradovic
date: 2024-03-28
tags: [eightshift, boilerplate, templates]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Sometimes you need your posts to follow a specific structure, or you simply want to provide a good starting point for the editors. This blog post will cover what post templates are, how to set them up, and what options they offer.
<!--truncate-->

> A simple use case of post templates can be a review or a testimonial. You want each review to be a separate post and to use a single Quote block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple use case of post templates can be a review or a testimonial. E.g. you want each review to be a separate post and to use a single Quote block.
```

If you don’t have the new post type registered, you can refer to one of the previous blog posts which explains how to [register Custom Post Types](/blog/using-cpts-and-taxonomies). Once the new post type is registered, you can set the `template_lock` argument.

## Template locking options

The best way to lock the template is by adding the `template_lock` argument into a `return` statement from the `getPostTypeArguments` method in your post type class.

```php
return [
	// ...
	'template_lock' => 'all',
];
```

There are three ways of locking the template:

- `all` - blocks can’t be inserted, removed, or moved around. Content can be edited for existing blocks
- `insert` - you can’t insert or remove blocks, but you can move them around

> - `contentOnly` - locks everything, not even the content can be modified (?) - it may work differently on default Gutenberg blocks, but this is how it behaves with Eightshift blocks

Reviewer 2: Let's maybe drop this one, as it's not the best documented, and for what we known, might change at any time 😄

Author: Agreed, testing it and researching about it was an experience to say the least 😂

:::note
It’s not mandatory to use `template_lock` if you’re using post templates. You can leave it out and have it fully unlocked to give the editors the freedom to modify the proposed template.

> :::

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention that you can lock certain blocks only by adding attributes:
```js
lock: {
    remove: true,
    move: true,
  }
```

## Adding a template

A recommended approach for adding a post template is to add a service class. For this example, the post type is **Review**, so the WP-CLI command for creating a new service class looks like this:

```bash
wp boilerplate create service-example --folder=BlockTemplates --file_name=ReviewTemplate
```

> You can call your namespace (folder) **BlockTemplates** or **PostTemplates**, whichever you prefer. If you’re adding a template for another post type, create a separate class, but include it in the same namespace. That way you’ll have a much better overview of the templates in the project.

Reviewer 2: Just my €0.02, but `BlockTemplates` could maybe be confused with patterns?

Maybe a "cooler" structure would be `Templates/<PostType>Template`

> Here’s an example of how to add a single Quote block as a template:

Reviewer: Maybe add a note that the Quote block uses two components in this example (paragraph: paragraph, author: paragraph)

Author: Not really sure if it's that relevant for this example. This is the default structure for the Quote block, and I added these placeholders just as an example of passing values to the attributes. I didn't want to have only `wrapperSimple` or even an empty array 😄

public function registerReviewTemplate(): void
{
	$reviewPostType = \get_post_type_object(ReviewPostType::POST_TYPE_SLUG);

	$reviewPostType->template = [
		[
			'eightshift-boilerplate/quote',
			[
				'wrapperSimple' => true,
				'quoteQuoteParagraphContent' => 'Content placeholder',
				'quoteQuoteAuthorContent' => 'Author name placeholder',
			]
		],
	];
}
```

To assign a post template, you need to get the post type object and then update the `template` property. Alternatively, you can also lock the post template in this method with the `template_lock` property, but it’s much cleaner to do it during custom post type registration.

Don’t forget to register your method with `add_action`:

```php
\add_action('init', [$this, 'registerReviewTemplate'], 20);
```

## Building complex layouts

As you can see from the previous example, you can set any attribute you want, including wrapper-related options. The easiest way to add a complex post template is by building it in the Gutenberg editor first, then switching to Code Editor and copying the content. This will have to be rewritten in PHP to make it work, and here’s how to do it. Let’s say the code for the blocks looks like this:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: This'll probably look better as plaintext (no lang. provided)

<!-- wp:eightshift-boilerplate/paragraph {"paragraphParagraphContent":"Placeholder text"} /-->

<!-- wp:eightshift-boilerplate/cta-modal {"ctaModalButtonContent":"Apply now!","ctaModalEndDateHide":true} -->
<!-- wp:eightshift-boilerplate/heading {"wrapperUseShowControl":false,"wrapperSimpleShowControl":false,"wrapperSimple":true,"wrapperAnchorId":"apply-now","headingHeadingContent":"Application form","headingHeadingSize":"h4:bold","headingAlign":"center"} /-->

<!-- wp:eightshift-forms/forms /-->
<!-- /wp:eightshift-boilerplate/cta-modal -->
```

This is how it looks when you rewrite it in PHP.

```php
$eventPostType->template = [ // array that holds all blocks.
	[ // array that holds a Paragraph block.
		'eightshift-boilerplate/paragraph', // full block name.
		[ // array that holds block attributes.
			'paragraphParagraphContent' => 'Placeholder text',
		]

> 	],

Reviewer 2: Maybe instead of all these comments, extract one block above and just explain how it's structured

Author: Not sure about this one, on one hand it does seem a bit cluttered with the comments, but somehow I prefer the idea of having a real example broken down and added comments that explain each part.

			'ctaModalButtonAlign' => 'center',
		],
		[ // array of inner blocks for a CTA Modal block.
			[
				'eightshift-boilerplate/heading',
				[
					'wrapperAnchorId' => 'apply-now',
					'headingHeadingContent' => 'Application form',
					'headingHeadingSize' => 'h4:bold',
					'headingAlign' => 'center'
				]
			],
			[
				'eightshift-forms/forms',
				[] // not passing any attributes, so we just include an empty array.
			]
		]
	]
];
```

The comments were added above for an easier understanding of the structure. So, to summarize:

- the `template` property is an array that holds all blocks
- each block is a separate array that accepts three values in the following order: block name (string), block attributes (array), and inner blocks (array)
- the process of adding inner blocks is the same as for adding blocks to the main content

## Editor options for unlocking the templates

Even though the templates can be locked, some blocks can still be unlocked. This can be done by selecting a block and clicking on a lock icon. When locking or unlocking a block in this way, you can toggle two options:

- **Disable movement** - disable moving the block around

> - **Prevent removal** - prevents the block from being deleted

Reviewer 2: (this is linked to the attributes for per-block-locking I mentioned above 😄)

Sometimes you need your posts to follow a specific structure, or you simply want to provide a good starting point for the editors. This blog post will cover what post templates are, how to set them up, and what options they offer.
<!--truncate-->

> A simple use case of post templates can be a review or a testimonial. E.g. you want each review to be a separate post and to use a single Quote block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simple use case of post templates can be a review or a testimonial. For example, you want each review to be a separate post and to use a single Quote block.
```
